docs: range proofs (#82)
tari-project/rfcs: src/RFC-0181_BulletproofsPlus.md

- Range proofs can be _aggregated_; that is, a single range proof can assert valid range for multiple commitments in an efficient way.
- A set of arbitrary range proofs can be verified in a _batch_; that is, the verifier can check the validity of all proofs in the set at once in an efficient way.
- The prover can assert a nonzero minimum value bound to a commitment.
- The prover can delegate to certain verifiers the ability to recover the masks used for the extended commitment in a non-aggregated proof.

The Bulletproofs+ preprint does not address extended commitments, as it only defines its range proving system using Pedersen commitments.
However, a later preprint for [Zarcanum](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1478) updates the algorithms and security proofs to accommodate one additional mask, and the reasoning extends generally.
Aggregation of range assertions using Pedersen commitments is described in the Bulletproofs+ preprint, and the Zarcanum preprint describes the corresponding changes for extended commitments.
Batch verification is described only informally in the Bulletproofs+ preprint, and in an incomplete fashion.
Minimum value assertion is not addressed in the preprint.

> An approach to mask and value recovery was [used by Grin](https://github.com/mimblewimble/grin-wallet/issues/105) for a different range proving system, and can be modified to support Bulletproofs+ range proofs with extended commitments.

Reviewer: We can also reference the deprecated RFC-0180 here as the previous Tari implementation for mask and value recovery

Author: What's the correct way to deprecate RFC-0180?

## Extended commitments and aggregation

We now describe how to reduce verification of a single aggregated range proof using extended commitments to a single multiscalar multiplication operation.
A partial approach is described in the Bulletproofs+ preprint.
The single multiscalar multiplication used to verify an aggregated range proof can be written more explicitly in our case by accounting for the extra steps used to support extended commitments, and by noting that the $P$ input term to the weighted inner product argument is replaced by the term $\widehat{A}$ defined in the overall range proving protocol.

Suppose we index the inner product generator vectors $\vec{G}$ and $\vec{H}$ using $i$, the inner product recursion generator vectors $\vec{L}$ and $\vec{R}$ using $j$, the aggregated commitment vector $\vec{V}$ by $k$, and the extended commitment mask generator vector $\vec{H}\_c$ by $l$.
We assume indexing starts at zero unless otherwise noted.

> Single aggregated proof verification reduces to the following:

Reviewer: Again, a reference to the Zarcanum/BP+ pre-print would help, and everywhere else

\\[
\sum\_i (r'es\_i) G_i + \sum\_i (s'es\_i') H\_i + \sum\_l \delta\_l' H\_{c,l} = e^2 \widehat{A} + \sum\_j (e^2e\_j^2) L\_j + \sum\_j (e^2e\_j^{-2}) R\_j + e A' + B
\\]
But we also have that
\\[
\widehat{A} = A - \sum\_i z G\_i + \sum\_i (z + d\_iy^{mn-i}) H\_i + x G\_c + y^{mn+1}\sum\_k z^{2(k+1)} (V\_k - v\_{\text{min},k} G\_c)
\\]
defined by the range proving system outside of the inner product argument.
Here
\\[
\begin{align*}
x &= \langle \vec{1}^{mn}, \overrightarrow{y}^{mn} \rangle z - \langle \vec{1}^{mn}, \vec{d} \rangle y^{mn+1}z - \langle \vec{1}^{mn}, \overrightarrow{y}^{mn} \rangle z^2 \\\\
&= z\sum\_{i=1}^{mn} y^i - y^{mn+1}z\sum\_{i=0}^{mn-1}d\_i - z^2\sum_{i=1}^{mn} y^i
\end{align*}
\\]
is a scalar defined entirely in terms of constants and challenge values from the proof.
Grouping terms, we find that a single aggregated range proof can be verified as:
\\[

> \sum\_i (r'es\_i + e^2z) G\_i + \sum\_i (s'es\_i' - e^2(z + d\_iy^{mn-i})) H\_i + \left( r'ys' - e^2x + e^2y^{mn+1}\sum\_k z^{2(k+1)}v\_{\text{min},k} \right) G\_c + \sum\_l \delta\_l' H\_{c,i} - \sum\_k (y^{mn+1}z^{2(k+1)}e^2) V\_k - e^2 A - \sum\_j (e^2e\_j^2) L\_j - \sum\_j (e^2e\_j^{-2}) R\_j - e A' - B = 0

Author: Is there support for something akin to the `multline` environment available? That environment does a really good job of spacing for exactly this use case, but it doesn't seem to work with `mdbook`.

The reason for this rather convoluted algebra is twofold.
First, it means that each unique generator used across a batch is only evaluated in the resulting multiscalar multiplication once; since the generators $\vec{G}, \vec{H}, G\_c, \vec{H}_c$ are globally fixed, this provides significant efficiency improvement.
Second, the use of algorithms (like those of Straus and Pippenger and others) to evaluate the multiscalar multiplication scale slightly sublinearly, such that it is generally beneficial to minimize the number of multiscalar multiplications for a given set of generators.
This means our approach to batch verification is effectively optimal.

## Designated mask recovery

It is possible for the prover to perform careful modifications to a non-aggregated range proof in order to allow a designated verifier to recover the masks used in the corresponding extended commitment.
The construction we describe here does not affect the verification process for non-designated verifiers.
Note that this construction requires a non-aggregated proof that contains a range assertion for only a single commitment.

> Unlike the approach described initially by Grin for the Bulletproofs range proving system, it is not possible to embed additional data (like the commitment value) into a Bulletproofs+ range proof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the approach described initially used by Tari for the Bulletproofs range proving system, it is not possible to embed additional data (like the commitment value) into a Bulletproofs+ range proof.
```

The general approach is that the prover and designated verifier share a common nonce seed.
The prover uses this value to determinstically derive and replace certain nonces used in the proof.
During the verification process, the designated verifier performs the same deterministic derivation and is able to extract the commitment masks from the proof.
Because the resulting proof is still special honest-verifier zero knowledge, as long as the nonce seed is sampled uniformly at random, a non-designated verifier is not able to gain any information about the masks.

After sampling a nonce seed, the prover passes it through an appropriate set of domain-separated hash functions with scalar output to generate the following nonces used in the proof:
\\[

> \\{\eta\_k\\}, \\{\delta\_k\\}, \\{\alpha\_k\\}, \\{d\_{L,j,k}\\}, \\{d\_{R,j.k}\\}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\\{\eta\_k\\}, \\{\delta\_k\\}, \\{\alpha\_k\\}, \\{d\_{L,j,k}\\}, \\{d\_{R,j,k}\\}
```

Author: Nice catch! Your eyes are clearly better than mine!
